# Pharmacokinetics-of-Parkinson-s-Disease-DRT
Computational Systems Biology Final Project


Background:
As the second most common neurodegenerative disease, 90,000 individuals are diagnosed with Parkinson’s Disease (PD) every year in the United States. In total, there are around 1,000,000 individuals living with PD in the U.S, and is considered to be a key contributor to disability across the world1-4. A 2015 study aggregated data from 1990 to 2015, and identified that the number of individuals affected by PD has doubled5. By 2030, cases are expected to reach 1,200,000 in the US alone - a 20% increase in incidence from 2022 data1. Furthermore, it is estimated that a total $52 billion in economic burden is attributed to PD related costs6,7.

Parkinson’s disease is commonly known as an aging-related disease. As such, the prevalence of PD increases across age groups1-8. In a meta-analysis from 2014, the prevalence in individuals under the age of 50 is 41 per 100,000 people, whereas 1903 per 100,000 people in individuals over the age of 808. Besides age as a risk factor, geographic location and sex have shown to be risk factors in PD incidence1,2. Both incidence and prevalence of PD are associated with a 1.5 to 2.0 times increased risk for males compared to females3. Additionally, incidence rates are generally higher in regions where industrial chemicals and manufacturer are more prevalent (i.e. Rust Belt)1.

Symptoms associated with Parkinson’s vary. In the early stages, patients can exhibit tremors, loss of smell, sleeping problems, dizziness and fainting, and many other symptoms9. With lack of unique symptoms attributed to early stages of PD, it is difficult to diagnose. Thus, incorporating the history of the patient's family regarding any neurological disorders can be useful. Even for medial to late stages of PD, clinical symptoms are the main diagnostic technique. The main symptom is bradykinesia, which is a general slowness of movement exhibited by the patient10. This must be accompanied by one or more additional symptoms, such as severe tremors, trouble maintaining balance, and/or difficulty maintaining (straight) posture11,12. Some imaging techniques like CT, MRI, or DaTscans scans can be ordered, but are seldom effective and are only adjunctly utilized to confirm clinical diagnosis13.

As a neurological disease impacting motor control, Parkinson’s Disease is caused by the accumulation of degenerated neurons in the substantia nigra region of the brain14. The substantia nigra produces the neurotransmitter dopamine, which is the essential component of communication between the substantia nigra and basal ganglia14-16. This interneuronal communication is essential for movement exhibited by multicellular organisms12,14. Over the course of aging, PD pathology manifests when the nerve cells of the substantia nigra lose their dopamine-producing function. In accordance, the quantity of available dopamine diminishes14. Once a threshold of ~70-80% of substantia nigra exhibits loss of function, symptoms manifest and diagnosis is possible17. 

Due to the lack of dopamine producing neurons in the substantia nigra, one of the main treatments is known as dopamine replacement therapy (DRT)12,18,20. Dopamine is a highly polar molecule which prevents the neurotransmitter from directly crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB)19. Thus, using the dopamine-precursor molecule called Levodopa (L-Dopa) is the gold standard for DRT18,20-22. The enzyme Aromatic L-Amino acid Dopa Decarboxylase (AADC) synthesizes dopamine from L-Dopa that has entered the brain. When treating with L-Dopa, starting doses are small and are slowly increased in increments depending on patient symptoms and response. However, the path from L-Dopa to dopamine is complicated by other pathways competing for the bioconversion of the precursor molecule. This leads to the requirement of other adjuvant drugs to complement the effects of L-dopa.

In the PNS, other dopa decarboxylases (DDCs) will convert L-Dopa to dopamine before it can reach the BBB. Thus, peripheral dopamine decarboxylase inhibitors (i.e. Carbidopa) are frequently administered in conjunction with L-dopa to prevent the premature conversion - allowing more L-dopa to pass the BBB and be converted into dopamine23. An additional limitation is catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme which deactivates and degrades L-Dopa both in the PNS and the CNS25. Thus, the use of COMT inhibitors is another essential strategy to maintain faithful L-dopa delivery and synthesis of dopamine in the brain26. In the CNS, another enzyme is monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B), which functions to regulate and catabolize certain neurotransmitters, including dopamine27. MAO-B inhibitors block the catabolism of dopamine, enhance dopamine signaling, and are frequently used in treatment as well28. One particular MAO inhibitor is selegiline, which preferentially inhibits MAO-B at low doses and prevents metabolism of dopamine29,31. Considering the MAO-B, COMT, and decarboxylase inhibitors, the delivery and bioconversion of L-dopa to dopamine is challenging. 

Depending on the patient and their ability to tolerate side effects, a combination of these drugs can be administered. However, ideal dosing regimens are not well understood, and side effects can be severe. Depending on the patient's age and molecular profile, L-dopa can cause severe nausea, dizziness, headaches, hallucinations, psychosis, and other neurological side effects24. Many of these symptoms are due to metabolic conversion of L-dopa by the DDCs in the PNS, for which carbidopa can be utilized. Carbidopa is a DDC inhibitor incapable of crossing the BBB, blocks L-dopa conversion to dopamine in the PNS, and results in an increased potency of L-dopa absorption into the CNS30. As such, levodopa and carbidopa are administered in tandem to increase efficiency of treatment. Sinemet is an orally administered drug which combines both L-dopa and carbidopa into one capsule. Thus, the carbidopa improves the potency of L-dopa whilst mitigating the adverse symptoms from it32. Rytary, similar to Sinemet, combines both carbidopa and levodopa. Specifically, Rytary uses the ratio of 4:1 levodopa to carbidopa33. Unique to Rytary is the split of immediate release to extended release, which is a one third to two thirds split respectively34. Both drugs have been proven effective, but dosing titrations are still not well understood on a per patient basis35.

By modeling the pharmacodynamics of L-dopa absorption, we can understand the effects of differing dosage regimens on the rate of absorption. For model simplicity, only selegiline, carbidopa, and levodopa are considered. Figure 1 depicts the relationship between these three drugs.



Figure 1. Simplified pharmacokinetic landscape of L-dopa passing the blood brain barrier (BBB). In the PNS, carbidopa inhibits the decarboxylase activity from the AADC enzyme, preventing the premature conversion of the precursor molecule to dopamine. This allows the transfer of L-dopa across the BBB, where it is converted into dopamine by other decarboxylases. MAO-B enzymes function to mark dopamine for degradation, but selegiline inhibits MAO-B molecules. Thus, dopamine accumulates and begins relieving some of the motor function distress in the patient.
